---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "Can larvae sense differences in pH?"
date: 2016-11-13
---
Ocean acidification is a distressing issue to think about, especially if you’re concerned about the continued success of marine organisms. The diffusion of atmospheric carbon dioxide results in the lowering of pH within the world’s oceans, which could have effects on the biology of marine invertebrates. With that being said, there was a recently published [article on sea hare calcification](http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/pdfplus/10.1086/690094) in which they found that biomineralization was unaffected under OA conditions. Molluscan calcification could be an exception as it occurs in the mantle, and is largely protected from abiotic conditions. But what about the other organisms that depend on extracellularly mediated assembly of calcified structures? Do they sense changes in their environment and move to areas that are more favorable in pH?

You would be hard-pressed to find studies that have examined the effects of ocean acidification on animal behavior.  I did a quick literature search looking for molecular sensing of pH in animals, and found that indeed, there are [some types of GPCRs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proton-sensing_G_protein-coupled_receptors) that respond to chemical fluctuations of protons. These GPCRs are expressed in humans, but are there orthologs in other animals too? The larval stage of marine animals is often responsible for determining the ecological distribution of the adult form, making them a good life-history stage to test sensing of pH.

Recently, a classmate and I created a stratified column with two different pH water layers, and introduced larvae to the bottom of the column. If larvae are able to sense changes in pH then perhaps they avoid the acidified water once they reach it. This is actually, exactly what we observed. Larvae did not swim to the top of the water column where the acidified water was located. When we reversed the layers of water (acidified water on bottom and normal water on top), larvae swam to the top of the water column, avoiding the acidified seawater on the bottom. Our controls exhibited no significant deviations, especially the salinity control, which we used to adjust the density of the seawater.

Future studies might examine gene expression of larvae once they reach the acidified water. Expression of GPCRs during this depth could be an indicator sensing of pH during the larval stage. Ecological implications may also begin to be formed. For example, what happens to the vertical distribution of larvae in upwelling zones? Cold, nutrient-rich seawater that has low pH could result in aberrations from their normal ecological distribution. Clearly, more information is needed to fully understand the impacts of ocean acidification on larval distribution.
